              Nuclear Physics Lab instructions


                               March 7, 2024


We shall discuss mechanisms of radiation attenuation by matter, as well as
some statistical aspects of the measurements. In particular we shall discuss
why the number of particles detected during a fixed time interval obeys the
Poisson distribution, and how this distribution can be distinguished from
the Gaussian one.
Note: For the first reading, you may focus on the highlighted
paragraphs.


Contents
1 Introduction                                                                 2

2 Background                                                                  3
  2.1 α-particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
  2.2 β–particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
  2.3 γ-particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

3 Penetration range                                                            5
  3.1 α-particles range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
  3.2 β-particles range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
  3.3 γ-ray attenuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
  3.4 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10

4 Radiation statistics                                                        11

5 Experimental setup                                                     12
  5.1 Geiger Müler counter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  5.2 Inverse-square law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15



                                       1
6 Step-by-Step Experiment Procedures                                       15
  6.1 Background radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  6.2 Poisson statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
  6.3 Attenuation of β-radiation and estimation of maximal β-particle
      energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  6.4 Alpha particles range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19


1    Introduction
We shall focus on radiation emitted by nuclei, specifically on three distinct
types of radiation. Below is the excerpt from the Nobel Prize lecture, Chem-
istry 1908, by Ernest Rütherford. We would recommend to read the Nobel
Prize lecture for the fascinating history of radioactivity discovery.
”..these experiments show that the uranium radiation is complex and that
there are present at least two distinct types of radiation – one that is very
readily absorbed, which will be termed for convenience the α-radiation, and
the other of a more penetrative character, which will be termed the β-
radiation.” When other radioactive substances were discovered, it was seen
that the types of radiation present were analogous to the β– and α-rays of
uranium and when a still more penetrating type of radiation from radium
was discovered by Villard, the term γ-rays was applied to them. The names
thus given soon came into general use as a convenient nomenclature for the
three distinct types of radiation emitted from uranium, radium, thorium,
and actinium. On account of their insignificant penetrating power, the α-
rays were at first considered of little importance and attention was mainly
directed to the more penetrating β-rays. With the advent of active prepara-
tions of radium, Giesel in 1899 showed that the β-rays from this substance
were easily deflected by a magnetic field in the same direction as a stream of
cathode rays and consequently appeared to be a stream of projected parti-
cles carrying a negative charge. The proof of the identity of the β-particles
with the electrons constituting the cathode rays was completed in 1900 by
Becquerel, who showed that the β-particles from radium had about the same
small mass as the electrons and were projected at a speed comparable with
the velocity of light.”




                                      2
2     Background
2.1   α-particles

 An α-particle consists of two protons and two neutrons and is a nucleus
 of helium He. α-particles are emitted spontaneously by unstable heavy
 nuclei. This emission is rooted in the principles of quantum mechan-
 ics: Within an atomic nucleus, protons and neutrons are held by the
 powerful strong nuclear force, which counteracts the electromagnetic
 repulsion between positively charged protons. Quantum tunneling, a
 manifestation of the wave nature of particles at the quantum level, en-
 ables an α particle to surmount the energy barrier and pass through it
 despite lacking sufficient classical energy to pass above it. This emission
 is represented by the following equation:
                             A    A−4    4
                             Z X →Z−2 Y +2 α                              (1)

 where X and Y are the initial and final nuclei, A is the mass number
 (sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus), Z is the
 atomic number (number of protons in the nucleus) and α represents
 the emitted α-particle.

α-particles emitted from a particular species of nuclei are mono-energetic.
The energy of the most α’s falls in the range between 3 and 8 MeV. By
comparison, the typical energies of the chemical reactions are between 5 to
30 eV per molecule.
Preparatory question: what is typical speed of α-particles compared to
that of valence electrons? Is it a good approximation to consider electrons
as static when discussing α-particle–electron collisions?

2.2   β–particles

 Beta particles (β ± ) are electrons (β − ) or positrons (β + ) that are emit-
 ted from nuclei when a proton or a neutron decay by the weak force,
 emitting (β + ) or (β − ) referred to as β-plus and β-minus emission. In
 a β-minus emission, a neutron (n) becomes a proton (p) emitting an
 electron, e, and an antineutrino ν̄. The corresponding reaction is:
                           A    A        −
                           Z X →Z+1 Y + β + ν̄                            (2)




                                        3
Unlike α-particles that are emitted with well-defined energy from nuclei, β-
particles are emitted with a range of energies between 0, and the maximum
energy specific to the given radioactive isotope. The rest of the energy is
taken by antineutrino. The maximal energy of the emitted β-particles is a
characteristic signature of the emitting isotope. An example of intensity as
a function of the energy for β-decay is shown in Fig. 1.




Figure 1: Intensity of β-particle emission vs β-particle energy. The arrow indicates the
maximum energy Emax of β-particles. The left dashed line represents the average energy
of the β-particles, while the difference between the maximum energy and the average
energy corresponds to the average energy of neutrinos.


2.3    γ-particles

 A γ-particle, an energetic photon emitted by excited nuclei in their
 transition to lower-lying nuclear levels. It is uncharged, unlike α or β-
 particles. Since nuclear states have well-defined energies, the energies
 of γ-particles emitted in state-to-state transitions are also well-defined.




                                           4
3    Penetration range
 In the lab you will measure the thickness of the material which the
 radiation consisting of charged particle can penetrate before losing its
 energy due to scattering and absorption processes. This distance is
 commonly referred to as penetration range. There is some ambiguity
 in defining penetration range. It is typically defined as either Half-
 Value Layer (HVL) or Tenth-Value Layer (TVL): The HVL (TVL) is
 the thickness of a material that reduces the intensity of the radiation
 to half (tenth) of its original value. We shall adopt the TVL definition.
 A natural question to ask is why not to fit the radiation intensity to
 exponent and use the power as the measure of the range. You will see
 that your experimental data not always can be fit by a single exponent.

In this section we will explain how nuclear radiation interacts with material
between the source and the detector. Charged particles primarily inter-
act with atoms in the medium through Coulomb forces. They can excite
or ionize atoms, resulting in a decrease in the particles’ energy and conse-
quently slowing them down. We shall discuss the particle scattering using
the Rütherford’s differential cross-section dσ/dΩ formula:
                                                         2
                                         Z1 Z2 e2
                                
                         dσ
                            =                                                (3)
                         dΩ         8πε0 µv 2 sin2 Θ/2

dσ/dΩ depends inversely on the square of the reduced mass µ = m1 m2 /(m1 +
m2 ) of the interacting particles. In Eq. 3 Z1 and Z2 are the dimensionless
charges of the incident and target particles, e is the elementary charge, ε0 is
the vacuum permittivity, v is the relative velocity between the particles, and
θ is the scattering angle in the center of mass frame. The same formula can
be expressed through the energy Ec of the colliding particles in that frame:
                                                       2
                         dσ                Z1 Z2 Ry
                            = a20                            ,               (4)
                         dΩ              2Ec sin2 Θ/2
where a0 = 4πε0 h̄2 /(me e2 ) is the Bohr radius, and Ry = (me e4 )/(8ε0 h3 c) ≈
13.6 eV is the Rydberg constant; a20 ≈ 2.8 · 10−21 m2 sets the cross-section
scale.
Historically, he Rütherford formula was obtained by considering Coulomb
scattering classically. Quantum treatment in the first Born approximation
gives the same result. This approximation assumes that the scattering is
weak, so the amplitude of the scattered wave is small compared that of

                                           5
the incident one. We shall analyze α and β-scattering on the basis of this
formula, although it assumes both particles to be free, and thus ignores
material properties besides very basic ones: electron density and atomic
number. Both α and β-particles undergo scattering interactions with both
electrons and nuclei. However, their scattering is very different due to almost
4 orders of magnitude difference in masses (mα ≈ 7.3 × 103 me ).

3.1    α-particles range
α-particles are much heavier than electrons, and this determines peculiarities
of their scattering.

  1. α-particles scatter mostly on electrons. This is because their reduced
     mass with electrons is small, µα−e ≈ me , therefore their scattering
     cross-section on electrons is much larger than that on nuclei, despite
     nuclei having larger charge eZn . The ratio of the scattering cross-
     sections of an α-particle on an electron and on a nucleus, from Eq. 3,
     is (mα /Zn · me )2 ≈ 4.5 · 104 .

  2. Since the mass of an α-particle is much larger than that of an elec-
     tron, after the scattering on an electron the α-particle is almost not
     deflected and continue to move in the original direction. Indeed, the
     conserved center of mass momentum is predominantly carried by the
     alpha particles. Consequently, the deflection of an α-particle after a
     scattering on an electron is minimal.

  3. Scattering on nuclei does occur, and it is this scattering that led to
     the original detection of α-particles by Rütherford. However, due to
     its much smaller cross-section, it is not the scattering that dominates
     attenuation of an α-particle beam .

  4. Most importantly, scattering of α-particles is strong compared to β-
     particles. This is best seen by looking at Eq. 3 and observing
                                                          p         that, for
     the came energy, the ratio of velocities is: vα /vβ = mβ /mα .
      Problem: Consider a 1 MeV α-particle and an electron at rest. Cal-
      culate the kinetic energy of their relative motion Er in the center of
      mass frame; Er is carried mostly by the electron. How does Er com-
      pare with the typical binding energy of an electron in, say, Aluminum
      (Z = 13). To what extent is it justified to consider electrons to be at
      rest?



                                      6
      Answer: Er = Eα me /(me + mα ) ≈ Eα me /mα ≈ 136 eV ≈ 10 Ry.
      So, considering electrons to be at rest can be justified only for the top
      occupied levels, and is not justified at all for the deepest ones with
      energy ∼ Z 2 Ry. But ignoring bounding of deep-lying electrons to the
      nuclei also is a crude approximation. Still, Rütherford formula is good
      for estimates.
  5. The α-particles range can be approximated as [1]

       R = 0.32(Eα /Mev))3/2 ×cm or R = 0.4(Eα /Mev))3/2 ×mg/cm2 (5)

Note that R is customary expressed both as length and as areal density,
which can be confusing.

3.2    β-particles range
  1. The reduced effective mass for electron-electron scattering µe−e =
     me /2, only twice smaller than that for electron-nucleus one: µe−n =
     me mn /(me + mn ) ≈ me . Due to larger nuclei charge eZ, β-particles
     scatter more on nuclei than on electrons. But not much more.
      Problem: Estimate the ratio of the scattering rates on electrons and
      on nuclei. Take into account that each nucleus with number Z is
      surrounded by Z electrons, so the scattering rate is proportional to Z
      for electrons and Z 2 for nuclei.
  2. For the β − e scattering, the energy in the center of mass frame is
     just about half of that in the rest frame. So, the cross-section for
     β-particles scattering, according to Eq. 4, is rather small compared to
     that of α-particles with the same energy. We can see it also from Eq. 3
     by observing that the speed vβ of β-particles with typical energy of
     1 MeV is large.
  3. Despite nuclei being effective in β-particle scattering, the particles lose
     energy through Bremsstrahlung (braking radiation), and this energy
     loss is small, so the scattering is quasi-elastic.
  4. As β-particles possess the same rest mass as electrons, unlike α-particles,
     they are deflected by scattering much stronger, although forward scat-
     tering still dominates. While radiation progresses through the media,
     it becomes less energetic, and its scattering cross-section increases.
     This leads to non-exponential decay of the radiation intensity. In ad-
     dition, secondary electrons and photons can be detected: Energetic

                                      7
      β-particles can dislodge electrons from the media. There is also pho-
      ton and electron emission when electrons in the media, excited by the
      radiation, recombine.

  5. Since β-particles lose energy mostly by scattering on electrons, their
     range in different materials is expected to scale inversely with the
     electron density. Therefore, the material-specific penetration length
     R(L) in units of length, say (cm), is customarily multiplied by material
     density ρ, in (g/cm3 ):
                                   R = R(L) · ρ.                         (6)
      The resultant R in (g/cm2 ) is almost material-independent. The
      range, both in (cm) and in (g/cm2 ) is customarily denoted by the
      same letter R. It would be more accurately to express the range for a
      material x through the range in the well-studied material, typically Al
      (Al is light, so the range in cm in it is long and easy to measure) as:

                                           (Z/A)Al
                                Rx = RAl                                  (7)
                                           (Z/A)x

      However, since most of the stable elements have almost equal number
      of protons and neutrons in their nuclei, Z/A ≈ 1/2, the correction of
      (7) is small.

  6. Energy dependence of the penetration length for Aluminum can be
     described by the empiric Flammersfeld’s formula [2]:
                           p                      
                RAl ≈ 0.11    1 + 22.4(E/MeV)2 − 1 × g/cm2       (8)

      One may apply correction Eq. 7 if more accuracy is needed. There are
      other approximations for β-particles range.

3.3   γ-ray attenuation
Gamma-particles (γ), which are energetic photons emitted by nuclei, are
chargeless. Therefore, their scattering cross-section is smaller compared
to that of β-particles. To absorb γ-radiation to one tenth of its original
intensity, a thick material is necessary. For instance, approximately 5 cm
of iron is required for Eγ = 1 MeV. For this reason, heavy materials, most
commonly lead, are used to screen γ and even less-energetic X-ray radiation.

Following processes are mainly responsible for γ-ray attenuation:


                                     8
  1. With similar reservations as for α and β-particles, the scattering of
     uncharged γ-particles on electrons, known as Compton scattering, can
     be described using the Klein–Nishina formula:

                                             λ′
                                                      
                     dσ     1 2 λ       λ            2
                         = re              +    − sin (θ) ,            (9)
                     dΩ     2     λ′    λ′   λ

     where λ and λ′ are initial and final wavelengths of the photon. Impor-
     tantly, the cross-section scale in 9 is the square of the classical electron
     radius re ≈ 2.82 · 10−15 m. Therefore the prefactor in Klein-Nishina’s
     formula is smaller than that of the Rütherford’s one by 9 orders of
     magnitude, and this process is not effective in γ-ray attenuation.

  2. Photoelectric effect. Its cross-section is about 10−27 m2 , and rapidly
     increases with decreasing energy.

  3. Electron-positron pair formation: occurs only for energies above 1.02 Mev,
     and its cross-section is small.

So, the γ-ray attenuation is mostly due to the photo-effect, and is much
smaller than that of the β.




                                       9
3.4   Summary

 To summarize, α-particles are predominantly scatter on electrons and
 continue their motion almost straight along the original path. Their
 scattering cross-section is large, and therefore their penetration range
 is small.
 β-particles scatter on both electrons and nuclei. Their scattering cross-
 section is significantly smaller than that of α-particles. This allows
 them to better penetrate through matter. While α-particles can be
 stopped by a few centimeters of air, β-particles can travel tens cen-
 timeters to a few meters in air before being fully scattered. For in-
 stance, α-particles emitted by Uranium-238 with energy 4.36 MeV have
 range 2.6 cm in air, while beta particles emitted by Carbon-14 with
 Emax = 0.156 MeV– approximately 22 cm, and by Phosphorus-32 with
 Emax = 1.71 MeV about 6 m.
 γ-particles penetrate most, and therefore their penetration is usually
 characterized by the attenuation coefficient and not by penetration
 range.
 The simple treatment above correctly captures the hierarchy of the
 attenuation of the different types of radiation, despite ignoring some
 processes that (i) attenuate radiation and (ii) can lead to secondary
 radiation. For instance, both α and β-particles can dislodge electrons
 from the media, and these secondary electrons can be detected. They
 can also lead to both photon and electron emission when electrons ex-
 cited by the radiation recombine. While radiation progresses through
 the media, it becomes less energetic, and therefore its scattering cross-
 section increases. All this together leads to non-exponential decay of
 the radiation intensity. Still, for relatively low-energy β-particles as
 emitted by Thallium-204, the exponential dependence fit the data rel-
 atively good.




                                     10
4   Radiation statistics
Suppose that distinct nuclei independently emit γ-particles or undergo
α or β-decay. It is not always the case: think e.g. about A-bomb as an
example, where stimulated chain reaction is initiated by spontaneous
decay 235 U or 239 Pu. However, with very weak radiation sources you
will be using, stimulated reactions are negligible. So, we expect the
observed radiation to obey Poisson statistics, see below.
Let us start with notations: the mean value of n is denoted by overbar:
n̄. The average over a distribution value as ⟨n⟩. n̄ → ⟨n⟩ for infinite
number of trials.

    1. The Poisson distribution expresses the probability P (n) of a given
       number events n events to occur during a fixed time interval τ ,
       assuming that these events are independent of each other and
       occur with a known constant mean rate λ.
                                          λn e−λ
                                P (n) =                              (10)
                                            n!
       A derivation of this formula can be found in the Appendix A.1.

    2. The Poisson distribution possesses a property that all its cumu-
       lants are equal to λ. In particular, the average is κ(1) = ⟨n⟩ = λ,
       the variance is κ(2) = σ 2 = ⟨(n − λ)2 ⟩ = ⟨n2 ⟩ − λ2 = λ, and the
       skewness κ(3) = ⟨(n − ⟨n⟩)3 ⟩ = λ.

    3. The relationship σ 2 = λ establishes the connection between the
       number of observed events and the√ expected Standard Deviation
       (STD) of the observations σ = λ. This is an important dis-
       tinction from the Gaussian distribution, where the mean and the
       STD are independent. It facilitates straightforward estimation
       of the measurement error for values resulting from the Poisson
       process.

    4. Further substantiation of the Poisson process can be attained by
       examining the third cumulant or skewness κ(3) . For the Poisson
       distribution, κ(3) = ⟨n⟩ = λ, while for the Gaussian one κ(3) = 0.
                                           √
    5. You shall utilize the fact that σ = λ, implying that you antici-
       pate the standard deviation (STD) of a measurement yielding n
                    √
       counts to be n. This is important for estimating the accuracy of
       your measurements and for including error bars when presenting
       your data.
                                      11
In one of the experiments, you will check whether the radiation-generated
GM counts are consistent with the Poisson statistics. You will do it by
repeating measurements many times, and examining the mean values of the
cumulants calculated from these measurements:

           (1)              (2)                    (3)
          Km   = n̄ = n,   Km   = (n − n̄)2   and Km   = (n − n̄)3        (11)
where n is an element of a set of the measurement results, and the averaging
                                                               (i)
is over the set of m measurements. We reserve notation Km for cumulants
as calculated from the measured values averaged over m measurements, to
distinguish them from the expected κ(i) from the Poisson distribution.
For the Poisson process, as the number of measurements m approaches in-
               (i)
finity all Km should converge to the same value λ. Let us estimate the
number of measurements required to check that. For this, we shall look
at σK (i) /κ(i) , where σK (i) is the expectation value of the STD of the i’th
        m                 m
cumulant calculated from m measurements.
One can show, see Appendix A.2, that:
                    √                     p                        p
  σK (1) /κ(1) = 1/ λm, σK (2) /κ(2) = 2/m, σK (3) /κ(3) = 15λ/m (12)
     m                          m                    m


Estimates ( 12) tell us that:
                                                               √
    1. The cumulants converge to the expectation value as 1/ m. However,
       achieving the same level of accuracy requires significantly different
       number of measurements, that increases with the cumulant number.
                                                        √
    2. For the first cumulant, σK (1) /κ(1) = δn/n̄ = 1/ N , as expected. So,
                                  m
       in order to get an accurate measurement rate it does not matter how
       to divide the measurements into intervals. Just the total measurement
       number N matters, also as expected.

    3. For ”uncertainty of uncertainty” σK (2) /κ(2) to be small, one does need
                                          m
       to repeat measurements many times.

    4. To get a small uncertainty of the skewness, a much larger number of
       measurements proportional to λ is required.


5     Experimental setup
The setup of the experiment consists of ST-360 pulse counter with GM tube
and a stand, as shown in Figure 6. The relevant parameters are in Table 1.


                                      12
Figure 2: The experimental setup: the GM detector positioned on top of a shelf box, set
of Aluminum plates of different thickness, spacers of different thickness, and radioactive
sources.

                 Distance between the shelves                            10 mm
      Distance between the top shelf and the GM window                 12.3 mm
                    GM window diameter                                  31.6 mm
                    Sample shelf thickness                               1 mm
                     GM window density                                 2 mg/cm2

                               Table 1: Setup parameters


5.1     Geiger Müler counter

 In your experiments, you will utilize a Geiger-Müller (GM) counter,
 based on the Geiger tube. Developed by Geiger and Müller in 1928,
 this early radiation detector remains widely used due to its simplicity,
 low cost, and ease of operation. The GM tube contains a noble gas,
 typically argon. When radiation enters the tube, it ionizes the gas gen-
 erating free electrons. An ionization event that results in just one or a
 few free electrons would be challenging to detect. Therefore, the detec-
 tor is designed to generate an avalanche in response to a few electrons.
 For this purpose, electrons are accelerated by high voltage between the
 anode and the cathode of the tube, wherein electrons ionized by in-
 cident radiation gain enough kinetic energy to collision-ionize another
 atom. This process generates avalanches, as illustrated in Fig. 3 and,
 consequently, current pulses that are detected. A threshold voltage is
 required for an avalanche to occur. During an avalanche event, addi-
 tional events cannot be resolved, leading to GM dead time.

Avalanches are sustained, in part, by ultraviolet photon emission resulting
from electron recombination with ionized inert gas. This prolongs the dead
time. To reduce the inactive period, methane or other quencher molecules

                                           13
are added to the noble gas. These molecules effectively absorb UV photons
emitted during the discharge, converting them into heat without generating
additional free electrons.
Before entering a GM tube, radiation must pass through a thin window,
typically made of mica–a low-density material that allows particles to pass
through with little attenuation. It is important to note that, due to their
short range, the interaction of alpha particles with a GM window signifi-
cantly reduces their apparent range. This factor should be taken into ac-
count when interpreting experimental results.
GM detectors are less sensitive to gamma radiation, because gamma rays
have smaller interaction cross-section with the gas in the tube (and with mat-
ter in general) compared to charged α or β-particles. Geiger-Müller tubes are
not identical, and require different voltage for optimal performance. When
a radioactive sample is positioned beneath the tube and the voltage of the
tube is ramped up from zero, the tube does not start firing right away; it
needs a minimal voltage for an electron avalanche to start. As the voltage
is increased beyond this point, the counting rate increases quickly before
stabilizing. The stabilization starts above a voltage commonly referred to
as the knee. Further voltage increase above the knee is expected to lead
only to moderate increase in the count rate, until the voltage becomes so
high that breakdown and spontaneous discharge occur; voltage on GM tube
must be kept below the breakdown.




                    Figure 3: Electron avalanche in GM tube




                                      14
5.2    Inverse-square law

 Below we discuss how radiation flux per unit area would change in the
 absence of scattering or absorption by medium. As a source is moved
 farther away from the detector, the detected radiation intensity would
 decrease proportionally to the solid angle Ω under which the detector
 window is seen from the source; we consider the source to be a point
 one. The angle Ω can be expressed through the radius of the detector
 window r and the distance to the source h, see Fig. 4 as:
                                            p
              Ω = 2π(1 − cos θ) = 2π(1 − 1/ (1 + (r/h)2 )          (13)

 For large distances Ω ≈ 2πr2 /h2 .




                      Figure 4: The experimental geometry.


6     Step-by-Step Experiment Procedures
Take a note of the date written on the radioactive sources you
are using, and write them in your report. The sources should be
placed label down to avoid attenuation by the label. A possible
exception – the statistics experiment.

    1. Turn on the power switch on the back of the ST-360.

    2. Double-click the STX software icon to start the program. You should
       see the blue control panel appear on your screen, as in Fig. 5.

    3. Set High Voltage (HV) to 900V.



                                      15
  4. To start a measurement, press the green “diamond” button. “Preset
     Time” is the time allotted for each measurement. You can stop the
     measurement any time, and the “Elapsed time” will be the time that
     has passed since the start of the measurement.

  5. The system is designed to do a set of measurements with a preset time,
     but I would encourage you to work differently. Since the relative error
          √
     is 1/ n, where n is the number of counts, set a relatively long mea-
     surement time, and stop the measurements manually when required
     number of counts is obtained. This will save you time when the count
     rate is high, and you would be able to use it when it is low. Write
     down into your Python notebook both the number of counts and the
     elapsed time. The number of counts will be used also to plot error
     bars.

  6. Aim at 3% error (about 1000 counts) when the rate is high. Be judge-
     mental when it is low: you might need to sacrifice accuracy in order
     to finish your experiments.




                     Figure 5: The STX software interface.


6.1   Background radiation
  1. Set the measurement time to 100 s.



                                      16
  2. With all sources in the lead cylinder, or at least far away from the GM
     tube, measure background radiation.

  3. Calculate the background radiation rate Ib , and save it for the future.
     It might need to be subtracted from the future measurements.

6.2   Poisson statistics
Objective: In this experiment, you will check whether radiation-generated
GM counts are consistent with Poisson statistics. You will do it by repeating
measurements many times, and examining the mean values of the cumulants
calculated from these measurements, as described in Section 4.
                                          (i)
We want sufficient accuracy to check if Km with i = 1, 2, 3 are close enough
                          (3)
to κ(3) = λ, e.g. STD(Km ) < λ/3. For this we need quite a large number of
                                                                         (2)
measurements: m > 9·15λ, see Appendix A.2. A similar criterion for Km is
less demanding. In order to keep the overall measurement time reasonable,
we want to chose a short time for a single measurement and a small count
rate so n̄ → λ is small, and therefore, m is not very large.

  1. Take a relatively weak source, for instance Cesium, and put it with
     label up to reduce the radiation flux.

  2. Set the measurement time to, for example, 10 s and calculate the av-
     erage rate. You want it to be, say, n̄ ≈ 5 counts per second to keep m
     reasonably small. If the rate is too high – increase the distance to the
     tube. If it is too small – maybe turn the source upside down or pick
     another source.

  3. Take a set of at least m = 150n̄ 1 second measurements. For n̄ = 5 it
     will take some 12 minutes–not that long.
                  (1)           (2)
  4. Calculate Km = n̄ and Km = VAR(n) = i (ni − n̄)2 /(m − 1) for
                                                   P
     the new large set of data.
                  (3)
  5. Calculate Km = VAR(n) = i (ni − n̄)3 /(m − 1). Compare it with
                                    P
                                               (2)   (3)
     n̄. For Poisson process we expect n̄, Km , Km → λ for m → ∞.
     Compare it also with the expectation for the Gaussian statistic: κ(3) =
     0.

  6. Plot the probability P (n) to get n counts as obtained from the mea-
     surements, and the Poisson and Gaussian distributions with the same
     n̄.

                                     17
6.3   Attenuation of β-radiation and estimation of maximal
      β-particle energy
Objective: This experiment aims at investigation attenuation of β-radiation
by varying the thickness of aluminum plates between the source and detec-
tor. The obtained range in Al will be used to find the maximal β-particle
energy for a few sources. You will use the Tenth-Value Layer (TVL) cri-
terium to determine the range.

  1. Place a 204 Tl radioactive source on the third shelf from the top and
     begin taking data.

  2. Measure the detection rate with accuracy ≈ 3%.

  3. Place an aluminum piece on the top shelf and take another data run.

  4. Depending on the degree of the radiation attenuation by the piece,
     decide what the next piece do you want to place.

  5. Repeat this a minimum of 7 more times. Each time add the data point
     to the plot of the counting rate vs. aluminum thickness. You want to
     have enough points to find the range. You can use the upper shelves
     to combine the pieces and get the sum of their thicknesses. You should
     increase thickness until the count rate drops at least ten times; if time
     permits, until it is close to the background level. Al low count rates
     you might need to sacrifice accuracy to save time.

  6. Plot the count rate vs aluminum thickness both is linear and logarith-
     mic scale. Find the β-particle range.

  7. Repeat the procedure with a 90 Sr and compare the results.




                                     18
             Figure 6: Decay scheme for (1) Strontium, (2) Cobalt, and (3) Thallium

  8. Do the same for 60 Co. Pay attention on the decay scheme. Why the
     results are different?

6.4   Alpha particles range
Objective: This experiment aims at measuring the α-particle range and
finding their energy by systematically varying the distance between the GM
detector and the α-particle source. In this case, the attenuation media
is air. We are interested in the attenuation of the particle flux per unit
spherical angle, not just the counting rate. Since α-particle range is just a
few centimeters, is comparable with the GM window diameter, and will be
changed in the experiment, the spherical angle Ω at which the detector is
seen from the source will change significantly. Therefore, you will need to
normalize the rate by the Ω, Eq.13. You will use 210 Po as an α-particle
source. Important: place the source with the label down, otherwise it would
block alpha particle propagation.
  1. Place the radioactive source on the 1st shelf and measure the count
     rate. Use the same considerations to balance the accuracy and time.

                                        19
    2. Since the range of the α-particles in air is just a few centimeters,
       use spacers to bring the source closer to the detector. Take a few
       measurements with the source approaching the top of the box.

    3. Move the source down one shelf and take the data again. If the rate is
       too small, say less than 1 cps, put spacers over the second shelf to get
       a reasonable count rate. Plot the data as you measure to determine
       the distances at which to collect more data.

    4. Subtract the background and calculate the source-to-GM distance us-
       ing taking into account 12.3 mm distance from the top shelf to the
       detector window. In order to obtain radiation flux per unit area, di-
       vide the count rate by the solid angle at which the tube sees the source,
       Eq.13.

    5. Plot the result as a function of the distance from the GM window.
       Find the range using TLV criterium.

    6. Take into account the areal density of the GM window 2mg/cm2 . For
       this translate the areal density to the respective length of the air,
       assuming that the range in distance is inversely proportional to the
       media density. Take air density to be 1.3 mg/cm2 .

    7. Find the α-particle energy from the range you found using Eq. 5


A      Appendices
A.1     Poisson distribution
The Poisson distribution can be obtained from the binomial one for N in-
dependent tries. The probability to detect n events out of N attempts is:
                                 
                                  N
                       PN (n) =       pn (1 − p)N −n ,                (14)
                                  n

where p is the probability to observe the event in a single attempt. We now
take N to infinity and p to zero, while keeping the expectation value of the
success number λ = p · N constant. We now observe that:

                                            (pN )n    λn
                              
                            n N
                     lim p         = lim           =
                    N →∞       n      N →∞    n!       n!


                                       20
      lim (1 − p)N −n = lim (1 − λ/N )N −n = lim (1 − λ/N )N = e−λ
      N →∞                  N →∞                    N →∞
We end up with the Poisson distribution of the probability to observe n
events:
                                   λn −λ
                           P (n) =     e                           (15)
                                    n!

A.2    Number of measurements required to estimate κ(i)
Below we estimate the number of measurements required to confidently dis-
tinguish between the distributions on the basis of their cumulants κ(i) . We
shall restrict ourselves with the first 3 cumulants, that coincide with the
central moments.
Let us start with recalling the following standard result: Consider an arbi-
trary variable x with average ⟨x⟩ = 0 and variance ⟨x2 ⟩ = σx2 . Suppose
                                                                      P we do
m independent measurements of x and the mean: ym = xm = (1/m) m          i=1 xi .
         2       2      2                  √
Then, σym = ⟨ym ⟩ = σx /m, or σym = σx / m. Now we apply this to uncer-
tainty of the cumulants.
                                                                              (1)
   1. The first cumulant: κ(1) = ⟨n⟩ = λ. The variance of the measured Km
      will be expressed through the second cumulant κ(2) = ⟨(n − λ)2 ⟩ = λ.
      We define x = n − λ, and y as above.
                              ⟨x2 ⟩ = ⟨(n − λ)2 ⟩ = λ
                               p                         √
                σK (1) = σym = λ/m, and σK (1) /κ(1) = 1/ λm                (16)
                   m                                m

   2. The second cumulant: x = (n − λ)2 − λ; ⟨x⟩ = 0
      ⟨x2 ⟩ = ⟨((n−λ)2 −λ)2 ⟩ = ⟨(n−λ)4 ⟩−2λ⟨(n−λ)2 ⟩+λ2 = ⟨(n−λ)4 ⟩−λ2
      The 4th central moment ⟨(n − λ)4 ⟩ can be directly obtained from the
      Poisson distribution. However, for an estimate in the leading order in
      λ ≫ 1 it is enough to use the Central Limit Theorem, and approximate
      ⟨(n − λ)4 ⟩ by the Gaussian result A.3.
      Anyway, ⟨(n − λ)4 ⟩ ≈ 3λ2 , and therefore:
                                                           p
                    σ 2 (2) = 2λ2 /m, and σK (2) /κ(2) =       2/m          (17)
                       Km                       m


   3. The third cumulant: x = (n − λ)3 − λ; ⟨x⟩ = 0
      ⟨x2 ⟩ = ⟨((n−λ)3 −λ)2 ⟩ = ⟨(n−λ)6 ⟩−2λ⟨(n−λ)3 ⟩+λ2 = ⟨(n−λ)6 ⟩−λ2
      Similarly to the above, ⟨(n − λ)6 ⟩ ≈ 15λ3 . and therefore:
                                                        p
                  σ 2 (3) = 15λ3 /m, and σK (3) /κ(3) = 15λ/m               (18)
                    Km                         m



                                       21
A.3    Central moments of Gaussian distribution
For a Gaussian distributed value x with ⟨(x−⟨x⟩)2 ⟩ = σ 2 all central moments
are: ⟨(x − ⟨x⟩)2n ⟩ = (2n − 1)!!σ 2n .

A.4    Sources
Radiation units: 1 curie – 3.7·1010 decays per second (dps). 1dps=1 becquerel
(Bq).
Thallium-204 104                       104
                  81 Tl β-decays into 80 Pb with Emax = 0.7 MeV.
Strontium-90 (90                        90
                   38 Sr) β-decays into 39 Y with Emax = 0.546 MeV. The Yt-
trium isotope’s half-life time is 28.8y, and it in turn undergoes β-decay with
half-life time of 64 hours and Emax = 2.28 MeV into 90  40 Zr (zirconium), which
is stable. Note that Sr/Y is almost a pure beta particle source; the gamma
photon emission from the decay of 90 Y is so infrequent that it can normally
be ignored.
Cobalt-60 (60 27 Sr) is mostly a γ-source with energies 1.17 and 1.33 MeV.


References
[1] G. R. Choppin, J.-O. Liljenzin, and J. Rydberg. Radiochemistry and
    Nuclear Chemistry. Butterworth-Heinemann, Woburn, 3rd ed. edition,
    2022. Chapter 6.

[2] A. Flammersfeld. Die absoluten intensitäten der β-linien... Zeitschrift
    für Physik, 114(3):227–244, March 1939.




                                     22
